>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations."
And we are coming to you
live from the Gaiam studios
here in Boulder, Colorado.
And since this is a
live interactive show
I encourage you to
interact with us
through Facebook and Twitter.
Many of you already have, so
keep the comments and questions
coming throughout the show.
So with all of the challenges
that are going on in the world,
where do we even find
a place in our lives
to have a conversation
about enlightenment?
And what is the difference
between self-awareness
and narcissism?
Can we be too self-aware?
Can we be so wrapped up
in our own complaints
that we don't look at the
bigger picture of why we exist?
Joining me today is spiritual
teacher and cultural visionary
Andrew Cohen.
And he's here to talk
about his new book,
"Evolutionary Enlightment- A New
Path to Spiritual Awakening."
And he's going to
talk to us about how
to achieve enlightenment in
the midst of all of our chaos.
Welcome to the show,
thank you for being here.
>>ANDREW COHEN: Hi, Lisa.
It's a thrill to be with you.
>>LISA: It's great, and an
honor to have you with us.
So why do you think that
people even seek enlightenment
in the first place?
What are we looking for?
>>COHEN: Well, there's
a couple of reasons.
Number one, I think people
get tired of suffering.
>>LISA: So tired of pain?
>>COHEN: They get tired
of pain and suffering.
Also, I think sensitive,
thoughtful people
want to have a
breakthrough where there's
a sense of actually being rooted
in something deeper than just
their ego.
>>LISA: Yes, and that's
where that question comes in,
is what's the difference between
self-awareness and narcissism?
I mean, can we be
too self-aware?
Can we be too caught
up in ourselves
to even see the bigger picture?
>>COHEN: Well, definitely.
I mean, I think there's
a cultural epidemic
in our day of narcissism.
And a narcissist is someone who
is compulsively self-concerned.
Always thinking
about oneself, always
thinking about
himself or herself.
>>LISA: That's what we were
taught to do though, isn't it?
>>COHEN: Well, we live in
a culture of narcissism.
We live in a
culture of flattery.
And we tend to learn, I
think at a very early age
these days, to always
be looking at ourselves
in the mirror of our own mind.
And this can be emotionally and
spiritually quite suffocating.
>>LISA: It was a bit
of a backlash though,
don't you think?
Because now you get a trophy
for just playing a soccer game,
you don't have to
actually win anything
to get the trophy these days.
I mean, it was--
>>COHEN: You mean we get a
prize just because we exist.
>>LISA: Right, we get
a prize for existing.
>>COHEN: Not because
we've necessarily
achieved something great.
>>LISA: What's that
a backlash from?
>>COHEN: Well, I
think this has to do
with the emergence of what's
called the sensitive self.
Especially in the
1960s, the mere fact
that we existed as
a sensitive, feeling
being was seen as having
great value in and of itself.
And the whole notion of merit
and of having to earn something
and to develop started to take
a second place to the sense
of we're special simply
because we exist.
>>LISA: So in the concept of
Evolutionary Enlightenment,
what is that?
What does that mean?
>>COHEN: Well, that's putting
the traditional Eastern
notion of enlightenment--
and enlightenment
means the experience
of consciousness
beyond ego, or beyond
the small self--
in the context of our emerging
understanding of evolution
that's based on Western science.
>>LISA: And you have been a
seeker of enlightenment pretty
much since your teenage
years, and now are
a teacher of this
vast, vast concept.
Can you tell us a little
bit about how you started
and what questions
did you ask when
you were young to seek
this enlightenment?
>>COHEN: Well, for me I had an
extraordinary experience when
I was a young person that
revealed to me that there's
much more going on here than
I had previously imagined.
I experienced, as
many teenagers do,
I had an experience of what's
called cosmic consciousness
when I was a young person that
really knocked me for a loop.
I had an experience
of beginninglessness
and endlessness.
An awareness of the
infinite, the whole universe
came alive in my own
mind and consciousness
for a few moments one evening.
And those few moments, I
realize, were more real
and I was more alive than
I'd ever been in my life.
So when I eventually
became a seeker
when I was in my
early 20s, it was
to rediscover what
had spontaneously
occurred when I was a teenager.
>>LISA: So you were trying
to get back to that split
second moment you had.
>>COHEN: Yes, I was trying to
rediscover those few moments
in my life that I had no doubt
were more real than anything
else I'd ever experienced.
>>LISA: Was that
complete total freedom
that you had in that moment?
>>COHEN: It was perfect freedom.
There was freedom from
self-consciousness--
we've been talking
about narcissism.
There was total freedom
from self-consciousness.
And there was an experience
of the inherent goodness
in the universe and
existence itself.
>>LISA: We have a
clip here of something
called Kosmocentric
Orientation You can kind of get
a glimpse into Andrew's world.
Take a look at this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>You want to begin
to see your experience
as part and parcel
of a continuum.
So the continuum that
I'm speaking about
began with the first cause, or
when the universe was created,
when something
came from nothing.
That's when the
whole process began.
So that's when this continuum,
that's when time began.
And so we want to
begin to learn how
to see your own experience
as the leading edge.
As the most sophisticated most
complex expression of a process
that started 14
billion years ago.
And when you really
begin to get this--
not just at a rational
level, but that's
a good place to start.
But when you begin
to see it and feel it
you begin to relate your own
experience of being alive,
your own experience
of consciousness
to the evolution of the cosmos
So the reason why
this is so important,
this particular time in history,
is because more and more of us
have to begin to get this.
So we're going to
pull ourselves out
of this narcissistic
nightmare and discover
the inherently thrilling
nature and the sense
of ultimate sacred
importance of who we are,
and what we're a part of,
and what we can actually do.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: I love the music.
That's your music, isn't it?
>>COHEN: Yeah, that's my band.
>>LISA: That's your band.
And you're a drummer.
>>COHEN: Yeah.
>>LISA: I love that.
So questions are coming in
from our Facebook listeners.
Dante's asking, how do I
move on a day to day basis
beyond the ego?
>>COHEN: Well, the way
to move beyond the ego
is we have to want to
evolve beyond our own ego.
We have to cultivate a
very big and profound
spiritual aspiration
to want to rise up,
way up above the place
we've been living
in our own mind and
emotions for a long time.
We have to really
want to be free.
Really want to be free.
You want to be free.
>>LISA: Well, what does
that mean to be free?
And aren't we all
living to survive?
>>COHEN: Well, we might
be living to survive.
But the fears and desires
of the small self,
once we transcend them, we
realize they're very small.
It's a very small little
place emotionally,
psychologically,
philosophically.
It's a very small
little-- it's like living
in a little tiny
cave all by oneself.
And when you transcend
it, you realize
that one was living in a
prison without even knowing it.
The thing is, the
prison can feel
very safe and
comfortable because it's
what's usually very
familiar to us.
So we have to be willing to want
to leave that which is familiar
so we can experience the
enormous freedom that's
on the other side of that.
>>LISA: So when you
had that experience,
and when you have sought out
the teachings of amazing people,
what is that light?
Give us a glimpse
into what it means
to have that limitless complete
sense of enlightenment,
of freedom.
>>COHEN: Well, it's
experiencing a boundarylessness,
it's a freedom from boundaries.
It's the awakening to, at
the level of experience,
that which has no
beginning and no end.
And simultaneously
recognizing that who you are
and what we all are is
not separate from that
which has no
beginning and no end.
It's birthless and deathless.
So it's becoming self-aware,
or self-conscious
of the infinite nature of one's
own being of existence itself.
>>LISA: Do you think that
our attachment to things,
and to people, and
to money separate us
from that experience
you're talking about?
>>COHEN: Well, from an
enlightenment perspective,
attachment to anything other
than that which is infinite,
then that which has no
beginning and no end
is going to cause us to suffer.
>>LISA: It's going to
cause detachment, right?
>>COHEN: Well, it will
cause attachment--
>>LISA: Attachment, sorry.
>>COHEN: It will
definitely cause it.
We will suffer.
>>LISA: So how do you
separate from that attachment?
How do you get to a
place of non-attachment?
It's a Buddhist
philosophy, right?
>>COHEN: Well, by coming to that
point in our own development
where we want that which has
no beginning and no end more
than we want anything else.
We want the infinite.
We want ultimate spirit, the
limitless nature of spirit,
of reality itself, more
than anything else.
We want to experience the
intimacy of that which
is intimate more than
anything else in life.
That has to come first for us.
It has to become our absolute
priority before anything else.
And when we make that
shift, if we can do that,
it brings so much space
to our relationships,
to our relationship with
life, because we no longer
feel bound to people,
places, or things.
>>LISA: And so this is what
you call nonduality, right?
>>COHEN: Well, nonduality is the
awakening to the ultimate truth
about the self, and
the ultimate truth
about the nature of reality.
And all the great mystics from
all the religious traditions
in the world all say
that the ultimate truth
about the nature of reality
and the nature of the self
is there's only
one, and not two.
The ultimate truth is that
there's only one, and not two.
And from an evolutionary
point of view--
and I'm very interested
in evolution,
which means we're all really
part and parcel of one
creative process, right?
And when we look at
evolution we realize
that the universe
burst into being
almost 14 billion years ago.
And everything that exists
is part of that one process
that is in progress, that's in
a state of cosmic unfolding.
And you, and I, and
everybody that's listening,
we're the eyes and
ears-- as human beings,
as highly evolved human beings--
we're the eyes and the ears
and the heart and the mind
of the entire process.
So it's one process,
and my body,
my mind, and personality--
as is yours-- is
an expression and a
manifestation of that one
process.
>>LISA: So how does
that get us into what
you call evolution, our
future conversation?
>>COHEN: Well, when
you awakened evolution,
evolution is a
moving train, it's
a process that's
going somewhere new.
In most of human
history, human beings
thought that nothing
was changing.
That the cosmos was static,
that nature was static,
and that human history
and culture was static.
But now we realize that
the cosmos is moving.
That biological
life is evolving.
And that human consciousness
and culture is moving.
So we're on a moving train.
We're part of a developmental
process that's going somewhere.
And the most exciting
part of all this
is that our human
creative aspirations,
our spiritual aspirations,
are an expression
of the desire in the
universe to evolve,
and to develop, and to
become more conscious.
>>LISA: So that's basically
how to get unstuck,
is by connecting into
that cosmic creation
that you're talking about.
>>COHEN: Well, sure.
Because for too many of us
we're living a small little life
based upon our
psychological personality.
And when you realize
that who I really am
is not separate from the
energy and intelligence that
created the universe and is
creating the universe, that's
awakening to itself in the
form of this body, mind,
and personality, our
experience, our sense
in the direct experience of
what it means to be alive,
becomes infused
with this awareness
of this cosmic deep time, big
picture, big history context.
And so our sense of being
alive grows enormously.
Life becomes really
big, really big.
Overwhelmingly big,
thrillingly big.
>>LISA: So great question
coming in from Facebook.
One of our listeners is
saying, if I get this concept,
how do I relate to others
that aren't interested in this
or are still in the
place, stuck in the ego?
>>COHEN: When you
awakened evolution,
you experience a
sense of inspiration.
You feel yourself to be
inspired by the same energy
and intelligence that caused
the universe to come into being.
When something came from
nothing, it was one big yes.
And so when you are
an individual who's
inspired, are turned on by, or
lit up by the creative process,
other people are drawn to you
because you become a living
expression and manifestation
of the inherent positivity
that is driving
this cosmic process.
So you become a very
attractive person
because you're turned on
by something very big.
And then people want to know,
man what's lighting you up,
what's turning you on, why
you so inspired all the time?
>>LISA: Right, right.
>>COHEN: It makes you a
very attractive person.
>>LISA: What also makes the
other, maybe a negative source
not stick to you?
And you're kind
of a Teflon figure
to that type of
negativity or depression,
because you hold that space
that's creatively inspired.
And we talked earlier
about creative stress--
this is an amazing
reframe for me,
is to look at stress in
a totally different way.
To find something that
is, as you said it,
taps into our creation
of our universe,
and then that was
creative stress.
>>COHEN: Well the whole idea
is that the creative process
is full of what I call
evolutionary tension.
So when the universe was
created, when the universe came
into being, it wasn't
a peaceful event.
It was a cosmic explosion.
Planets had to collide
into each other
to create more
complex compounds that
would make it possible
for life to emerge.
When we create
life, lovemaking is
made through creative friction.
When culture is created, when
philosophers come together
to discuss big ideas,
there's a creative friction
at the level of mind.
So creative friction,
which is the experience
of positive stress, is an
inherently positive thing.
And I think that with
the negative stress
that a lot of people
experience, which
is very common
these days, is when
we feel deeply consciously and
unconsciously deeply divided
about whether we
really want to be here.
Whether we're confused
about the relation
to existential
questions, whether life
is good, whether it's positive.
When we feel deeply ambivalent,
knowingly or unknowingly,
about being here we feel
overwhelmed by the stress
of existence.
But when we feel absolutely
free from ambiguity and free
from division about
being here we're
sure we want to be here in
this body, in this mind,
as ourselves because we
want to do everything
we can do to
wholeheartedly contribute
to the evolutionary process
and where we're going.
The stress we experience is
that positive creative friction
and we thrive on it.
>>LISA: Mhm, interesting.
It's definitely a
different perspective
from the debilitating
stress and looking at it
as something that stops you.
That type of stress
you're talking about--
>>COHEN: If we're resisting
life, if we're consciously
or unconsciously
resisting and holding away
the overwhelming reality of the
fact that we're already here
and we've got to get with it
because the time's already up,
then we're going to experience
it as very negative and very
unpleasant and we're going
to want to escape from it.
>>LISA: Many of our
Facebook questions
that come in
constantly are talking
about what is my purpose?
And I'm sure you have been asked
that question a million times.
But it's not what
is the purpose,
but how do you experience
that sense of purpose
while you're seeking whatever
it is you're seeking?
>>COHEN: I think the
question is a lot of people
want to know what my purpose is.
But my response to the
question is, well, I
think first you want to
find out who you really
are before you find out
what your purpose is.
Because I believe that when
we find out who we really are,
we simultaneously discover
what our purposes is.
So from an evolutionary
perspective, who I am
and who you are, beyond
the relative appearances
of a male body, a
female body, you know,
Andrew's personality
and Lisa's personality--
we're both equally the
energy and intelligence
that created the
universe and is creating
the universe in the form of
Lisa and the form of Andrew.
So when I realized
that if I just
think of what does Andrew want?
I'm going to come
up with one answer.
And I And I think, well,
what does the energy
and intelligence that
created the universe want
in the form of
Andrew?, I'm going
to come up with a
very different answer.
>>LISA: That makes sense.
When you're saying
this, we are all one.
And I've always
wondered this, how can
you say that when
I don't consider
myself one with a terrorist?
And I don't consider
myself one with someone
who wants to kill a child?
How do you explain that?
>>COHEN: Well, because
the positive things
and the negative
things that occur
are still all part of
one creative unfolding.
>>LISA: How, how?
>>COHEN: Because if you
stand back and you look,
it's all one process.
And good and very positive
things happen in the process,
and negative and horrible things
also happen within the process.
But the creative
process itself is one.
And that doesn't
mean that we need
to feel good about bad
things that happen.
We want to do what we
can to correct them
and to heal
woundedness, and we want
to make the world
a better place.
But the perspective
of nonduality,
the mystical insight into
the nature of reality
is it's one happening.
It's one event in which
all kinds of things happen,
both pleasant and unpleasant.
Good and evil, it's all
part of one unfolding.
But in the form
of the appearance
of a unique individual we
start taking certain positions
that we prefer good over evil.
Happiness and not suffering.
>>LISA: Duality again.
>>COHEN: But the
mystical perspective
is we see it all as part
of one unfolding process.
Like, for example, if you think
about what I was saying before,
if planets had to
collide into each other
to create more
complex compounds that
would make it possible
for life to emerge.
If we only looked at
the cosmic collision
as being a source of violence,
we would say that's bad.
But if you say, well,
that creativity also
served the evolutionary
process in the long run,
you begin to see that how
evolution unfolds is much more
complex and integrated then
we can actually imagine.
>>LISA: It is.
And I can understand
why this relates
to Evolutionary Enlightenment.
This gets us chunked up to
the biggest possible picture
so that we can understand
to get unstuck and get out
of our own egoic
survival, essentially.
When you have visited gurus,
or people in India who
have achieved enormous
enlightenment,
what is their way of
bringing people up
to this place of solving--
not even solving--
but basically solving
people's suffering
and pain in the world where it
comes to hunger and starvation?
>>COHEN: In the East, they have
a traditional-- what I call,
and the way that I look at
it, a traditional notion
of enlightenment-- they
want to awaken people
to what's called the timeless,
formless ground of being.
It's the deepest
dimension of reality,
and the deepest
dimension of the self.
And that's a place where there's
no time, in which there's
no space, in which
there's no world.
And if you enter very
deep states of meditation
we awaken to this timelessness,
to this formlessness,
to this place where
there's only being.
And it's a place where
nothing ever happened before.
It's what the Buddha called
the uncreated, the unborn.
And so if you enter into a
very deep state of meditation,
eventually everything
will disappear
and you'll experience the
freedom of timelessness.
>>LISA: Which is what we're
going to take a look at here.
There's a video that talks
about spiritual self-confidence,
and what that looks like.
Let's take a look.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>What is a human
being like when
he or she is
spiritually absolutely
convinced in the overwhelmingly
positive nature of existence?
What if you were
convinced beyond any doubt
whatsoever that
to exist is good.
That the will towards
existence is positive.
A lot of people aren't so sure,
because they say, well look.
There's poverty,
there's inequality,
there's environmental
degradation, there's fascism,
and all kinds of awful
things happen in the world.
And nature, look
what nature is doing.
Nature has tsunamis,
and volcanoes, I mean,
it's a very dangerous
place to be.
Well, life is a
kind of dicey thing,
you don't know what
you're going to get.
If we look at all these
particular problems, and all
these unpleasant and nasty
and horrible things that
can happen, do happen,
will happen, have always
been part of the
process, suddenly we're
not so sure that to
exist is too good.
Because, oh, well,
living to exist is good,
but then there's pain, there's
suffering, there's death.
What about all that,
why is there suffering?
How could God exist as
long as there's pain?
That kind of thing, right?
So what if in the midst
of all this complexity
and adversity if you
knew without any doubt
that the urge to
exist, which relates
to the Big Bang-- I interpret
the Big Bang as the desire
to exist in time and in form.
So what if you knew without any
doubt that the desire to exist
was overwhelmingly
positive in spite
of all the terrible
things that happen
in the process in
the midst of it?
But if you knew that
the will to exist
which started with the Big
Bang, and which we experience
as the sexual impulses,
the creative impulse,
as creative inspiration,
that the will to exist,
the will towards life, and
the will towards creativity
is overwhelmingly positive.
It's absolutely
positive and good.
Would that change your
relationship to life?
Because you know
that life is good.
Even though bad stuff happens,
you still now that life
is good.
The will to exist is good.
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: Yes, so this brings
up a Facebook question.
How do we heal woundedness?
>>COHEN: Well, from an
enlightenment perspective,
the best way to
heal woundedness is
to realize that the
deepest part of who you are
has never been hurt,
wounded or traumatized
by anyone or anything.
>>LISA: Wow, wow.
>>COHEN: The deepest part of
the self has never been born,
and never entered
the stream of time,
and therefore is
untouched by anything
that's ever happened in time.
And simultaneously, we can say
the energy and intelligence
that created the universe
and is creating the universe,
the creative force in the
universe, called Eros,
is indestructible.
It can't be hurt,
wounded, or traumatized
by anyone or anything.
It can't be stopped.
So what we do is we
learn how to begin
to identify with these
deeper dimensions of ourself,
and to begin to identify
less with these more
relative dimensions of the self.
And we begin to take our
woundedness a lot less
seriously.
>>LISA: That's actually
beautifully said, Andrew.
Is that the deepest, truest part
of us was never really wounded.
Very, very powerful words.
We're going to come--
>>COHEN: It's a
shift of identity.
>>LISA: It's a
And it's letting
go of our story.
And it's getting over
those and looking at them
as speed bumps in our overall
Evolutionary Enlightenment.
>>COHEN: Being willing
to let go of our story.
Being willing to.
>>LISA: Being willing to.
Well, we're going
to come back, we're
going to find out
exactly how to do this.
Andrew's going to
take us through some
of his teachings of the five
tenants of enlightenment
when we come back with
my guest Andrew Cohen.
We will be right back.
You're watching
"Gaiam Inspirations."
I'm Lisa Garr,
we'll be right back.
Welcome back, I'm
Lisa Garr and my guest
is cultural visionary
Andrew Cohen.
And we're talking about
Evolutionary Enlightenment
and how to achieve this
in a practical sense.
Do you think that
the world is really
ready for this conversation
about enlightenment?
>>COHEN: Well, I think there are
tons of people in the world who
are, and there are
a lot who aren't.
It depends upon your
level of development.
I think this teaching
is really for people
at the very leading edge
of cultural development.
That group of individuals
I call the luckiest people
that have ever been born.
I don't think--
>>LISA: How so?
>>COHEN: How so?
>>LISA: The luckiest people
that have ever been born.
>>COHEN: Well, ever
since the 1960s
there's been with the
baby-boomer generation,
with my generation, we've
come into the world,
we've been recipients of the
highest levels of education.
A standard of living that are
historically unprecedented.
Personal freedoms,
political freedoms.
Most of us can, more or less,
do anything that we imagine
or that we want.
And this is historically
unprecedented.
We live lives that kings
and queens could not
have even imagined.
>>LISA: You mentioned that
the overall level of violence
is down, globally,
and that there's
a lot of different evidence
around that as well.
>>COHEN: Well that's, we're
talking about progress,
human progress, and
that's a different issue.
It's true that there's
less violence in the world
than there's ever been.
There's less war, there's less
rape, there's less killing.
There's a book by the
Harvard psychologist Steven
Pinker called, "The Better
Angels of our Nature."
And he goes into a lot of detail
making the point that violence,
that human violence
of man on man,
that we are harming each
other less than we ever have.
And this is something that
most people don't know.
>>LISA: No.
>>COHEN: If that's not ever
a sign of human progress,
and of cultural evolution,
and moral development,
I don't know what is.
A lot of people seem to think
things are getting worse,
and it's not really true.
>>LISA: Yes, it seems
that's all we see and hear
about in the news is killings,
and people dying and things
getting worse.
It seems that there's more
awareness around that.
But there's actually less of
that going on, comparatively?
>>COHEN: Apparently,
much, much less.
>>LISA: So now
how does this have
to do with us being the
luckiest people in the world?
>>COHEN: Well, I
guess what it would
have to do with that is that
you and I are living in an era
where, in this case, violence
has been on the decrease,
but most importantly, there are
literally millions and millions
of us who are experiencing
a level of good fortune
that's historically
unprecedented.
The problem is most of us
don't seem to feel very lucky
and don't realize that we're the
luckiest people that have ever
been born.
And that, to me,
shows that there's
a spiritual crisis at
the level of culture,
if someone who's very fortunate
doesn't feel fortunate.
And too many of us feel stressed
out and very victimized.
We don't really--
because if you know
you're one of the luckiest
people that's ever been born,
you feel lucky,
you feel fortunate.
And also, if the most
fortunate among us,
I think, experience a sense
of obligation to all those
who aren't as
fortunate as we are.
And it's a sign of really
spiritual development
for many of us to
recognize our good fortune
and to stop being so
concerned about ourselves,
and to start being a
lot much more concerned
about everybody else
and this big process
that we're a part of.
>>LISA: So that ultimately is
Evolutionary Enlightenment.
How do you teach that?
What are the five tenets that
you talk about in your book?
>>COHEN: Well, the five
fundamental principles
of how to put the
teaching into practice
is the first one is
really organizing our life
around a very deep inquiry
into the question of what's
more important
than anything else?
And so I realized that the
evolution of consciousness
and the evolution
of culture was more
important than
anything else to me.
And if we realize that the
evolution of consciousness
and the evolution of culture
is more important than anything
else, we become very
focused on that.
We organize our entire life
around the whole principle
of evolution.
And evolution at the
level of culture, you see,
is very interesting.
Because many of us are
really living in the past.
Culture is our shared ideas,
our shared values, our shared
belief systems.
And when you embrace an
evolutionary worldview,
you're more interested
in where we're going
and what's possible
versus where we have been
or what other
people have told us.
We become very creative.
We become creative visionaries.
We become interested in
creating new possibilities,
not only for ourself,
but for everyone else.
We consider ourselves to be
Pathfinders, so co-creators
with other people of
where we're going,
not where we've already come.
>>LISA: So not paying so
much attention to history,
looking at it as milestones,
but looking forward
to creating something
out of nothing?
>>COHEN: No, no, no.
We can always only build on
what has already happened.
We can't wipe everything away
and go back to the beginning.
But the thing is we realize
history is not static.
And we suddenly realize
that there's not
a divine being that exists
outside the time process that's
guiding the process.
At this particular
point in history
we realize that where
we're going in the future
depends upon the choices we
make and the actions we take.
We are creating, you and I are
the energy and intelligence
that created the universe
creating the future
at the level of human culture.
And when we begin
to see that, we
awaken beyond the small
and narrow confines
of a small egoic psychological
perspective, a very personal
perspective.
And we start seeing with
big eyes into the big future
and realizing that if we're
so inspired, that it's
our obligation to do
everything we can to create it.
We feel ourselves called to live
big lives for the sake of where
we're all going together.
>>LISA: So the first tenet
being the Power of Intention.
>>COHEN: The
intention to do that.
The intention to live
our life in relationship
to do a very big
idea, to big ideas,
and to absolute
spiritual principles.
It's the opposite of a very
small, very personalized
worldview in relationship
to just my life.
We live our life in relationship
to cosmic evolution,
to biological evolution,
to cultural evolution.
We see our life as
the leading edge
of the whole process
right here and right now.
And so we become very concerned
with where we're all going.
Where we're all going depends
upon me, it depends upon you.
So I don't really have
time not to pay attention,
and not to care about
where we're going
and how we're
going to get there.
And it's important to make a
distinction, a lot of people
are worried about survival.
How are we going to
survive global warming?
How are we going to survive
the economic crisis?
And those are
important questions,
but even if-- just to
imagine for a moment
that the crisis
of global warming
was somehow magically solved,
and even imagine for a moment
that our economic crisis was
solved-- in terms of where
we're all going at the level
of culture and shared values,
that question wouldn't
have been answered yet.
So some of us have to
be concerned not just
about survival-- how are
we going to survive--
but how are we actually
going to evolve and develop
at the level of culture?
And that's a very big and
very exciting question.
>>LISA: A very exciting
question is a key point to that.
It is very exciting to
go into that direction.
And that takes us
to the next tenet,
which is that volition,
that power of volition
moving forward.
>>COHEN: Well the Law of
Volition is all about choices.
And in other words,
if we want to be
a spiritually
liberated individual
we have to come to that
point in our own development
where we stop blaming anybody
else for our predicament.
We cease to experience
ourselves as being victims.
Everybody who's been
born has, in some way,
been hurt, and wounded,
and traumatized
by another or others.
And sometimes it's
obviously more than others.
But if we want to
be free we have
to accept responsibility for
the consequences of everything
that's ever happened
to us and realize
it's all my own predicament.
We take full responsibility
for our own karmic predicament.
It's my problem, it's
not anybody else's.
>>LISA: Goodness, explain that.
You taking full responsibility
for your karmic predicament.
>>COHEN: Well, because
our karmic predicament
tends to be very complex.
Because who we are is
we're very complex beings.
We're all a product of--
there's biological history.
There's my personal
family history.
I'm Jewish, so
part of my history
has to do with my
ethnic background.
And there's so many
other dimensions
of all the different
ways we're conditioned.
So there's a lot that we have
to be responsible for if we want
to be able to become
masters of our own destiny.
Instead of being
victims of history
we want to become masters
of our own destiny.
In order to do
that, we have to be
willing to heroically take
complete responsibility
for everything that's made
us the person we are now,
and then decide who we want to
be and make those choices that
will make it possible for
us to become that person.
>>LISA: So basically taking
complete responsibility
for everything that's ever
happened to us and moving onto
the next--
>>COHEN: Endeavour to do that.
It's a heroic aspiration.
>>LISA: That's a whole show.
>>COHEN: It's being
willing to nobly embrace
the totality of our being.
And we will often
fail doing so, but we
need to at least try to take
that much responsibility
for who we are, and how we
are, and who we want to be.
>>LISA: I like how
you move it forward
and not getting stuck
into that place of pain,
but moving forward.
So that will then take us--
>>COHEN: Well, an
evolutionary orientation
is always about what can
be, never about what is.
An evolutionary orientation
is always about what can be,
never about what is.
>>LISA: So it's not so much
about the power of now,
being in this
moment, present time?
It's more about the next moment?
>>COHEN: In what I call the
traditional enlightenment
is about being in
the present moment.
In an evolutionary orientation
to liberation and to life,
it's always about
the next moment.
Because in a sense, the
present moment is already here.
We've always already
arrived in the present.
And so therefore, we can't
really change anything now,
but we can affect change in
what hasn't happened yet.
And that's why in
this orientation
it's always, always
future-oriented.
Because that's the
place, through volition,
we can actually affect change.
>>LISA: The next tenet, I see,
is more about authenticity.
I find this a very
interesting one.
What is it?
It is Face Everything
and Avoid Nothing.
>>COHEN: Well facing everything,
avoiding nothing is, I feel,
the most challenging, and
really the highest and most
profound form of
spiritual practice, which
is the practice of awareness.
And the practice of awareness
in all the great enlightenment
traditions is really the way
to become an enlightened person
is through the choice, or making
the effort to be more aware.
And so we can say, well,
most of us face very little
and avoid a lot.
Or face nothing and
avoid everything.
>>LISA: Why do we do that?
>>COHEN: Because
reality is hard to take.
And because we have the images
about who we are and often
they're very different
from how we actually are.
And because we tend to
be very, very sensitive,
very narcissistic.
We often can't, we
find it unbearable
to see ourselves more clearly.
And of course, if you want to
be free and you want to evolve,
if you want to
continue to develop,
we're not so afraid
of seeing the truth
because we don't want to
remain simply as we are now.
We're constantly
striving to evolve
to become more of
who we could be.
And so in order to
do that, we have
to remove all the obstacles.
And one of the
fundamental obstacles
is we're unconscious
of our motivations.
Often the left hand doesn't know
what the right hand is doing.
So we want to become
very conscious
of what's making us tick, of why
we're doing what we're doing.
Why we're making the
choices that we're making.
In order to do that, we have to
be willing to make the effort
to become a lot more
conscious than we tend to be.
But in this case, we're
going to remove the obstacles
to our own potential to evolve.
>>LISA: So if we face
everything and avoid nothing,
does that get rid of judgment?
Is judgment considered
avoidance, basically?
>>COHEN: Well, it all depends
on what you mean by judgment.
I mean, I think that a big
part of higher development
is learning how to discriminate.
Intelligent
discrimination, learning
how to make distinctions.
So some people think if you make
any distinctions between one
individual and another,
one quality and another,
if you make value
judgments, they
feel there's something
unspiritual or something
inherently negative about it.
But I don't actually
think that's true.
Part of higher
development is learning
discernment, the
art of discernment.
And so if we're going to
learn the art of discernment
we have to make value judgments.
And that's a big part, I
think, of higher development.
So I think learning how to
make accurate and truthful
judgments, or
value distinctions,
is a big part of
higher development.
I think that's something
we have to learn
how to do with greater and
greater degrees of accuracy,
and precision, and insight.
>>LISA: Can you give
me an example of that?
How do you, in your live, face
everything and avoid nothing?
>>COHEN: Well, to
be-- I don't think
it's possible to face
everything and avoid nothing,
but we want to strive to face
everything and avoid nothing.
And we want to do
that because evolution
is about development in time.
So in this particular
lifetime, we only
have a certain amount of
time to evolve and develop.
So we want to use
the time we have
in the most productive
manner possible.
We don't want to waste
time, because time
is all we have from an
evolutionary point of view.
So therefore, we want to
be very aware of what we're
doing, what's motivating us to
make the choices that we make,
so that we can be sure that
the choices that we make
are in alignment with our
highest ideals and aspirations.
>>LISA: I see, that
makes it connect.
That completely connects it
to the power of volition,
and therefore, the intention.
All right, so the next
tenet that you talk about--
and these are tenets.
Tenets are just guidelines.
These are things that you're
striving and achieving to--
>>COHEN: Well, it's a
spiritual context for living.
Because a lot of, what's the
context in which most of us
are living?
They say, well, I
don't really know.
It's just kind of I want
this, and I don't want that.
I said, I know but what's
the context, the picture,
the big picture in which
your life is lived?
For example, when
people are members
of some of the great mythic
religious traditions,
there's a meta narrative.
There's a big picture
which frames and helps
to orient life and
the way it's lived.
But for those of us who grew up
in a secular culture, a secular
context, we haven't been
given these big meta
narratives in which
to frame our lives.
And unfortunately
for us, it's really
come down to what's going
to make me feel good?
Life is all about me.
There's no moral, philosophical,
or spiritual context for life.
And it tends to make
getting somewhere big
and profound very difficult.
>>LISA: It takes the what's
in it for me out of it.
Very interesting.
So the Process Perspective
is the fourth tenet.
>>COHEN: Well, the
Process Perspective
is a very big part of an
evolutionary orientation
to life.
Because once again,
we're all part
of a cosmic process that
had a beginning in time
14 billion years ago.
And so we want to understand
that when there was the Big
Bang, there was a big cosmic
explosion of energy and light,
and matter emerged from nothing.
And then miraculously,
from energy and matter,
life emerged.
And from life, eventually,
human consciousness
and human culture.
So when we realize
that, we realize
that my capacity for
consciousness, and cognition,
and thought, and subjectivity,
and self-reflective awareness
is the product of this deep
time developmental processes,
I realize that my
body, that my mind,
and my personality has all been
created by this cosmic process,
by this biological process,
by this cultural process.
It's one process, they're
not many processes
from this perspective.
There's one process
that has given rise,
and is giving rise
to all of this.
And when you see that, you
begin to take your own life
less personally.
You begin to see the
process in everything.
>>LISA: That's the
Process Perspective.
The process of evolution that
we have gone through and that--
>>COHEN: You see every aspect
of your own personal life,
and of everything that's
happening in the world,
as a product of a
cosmic unfolding.
Not as discreet as the
discrete personal event,
or as some isolated
cultural event.
But you see everything is in
one way or another related
to everything else.
It's what they say
in Mahayana Buddhism,
it's similar with the law
of dependent origination.
Everything that exists
depends upon everything else
that exists.
>>LISA: So this is basically
taking this nonduality theme
again and saying that
we are not separate.
Don't take what we have, our own
experience personally-- which
I absolutely love-- and see
everything as evolutionary.
>>COHEN: Well,
it's true through.
I mean, everything
that you could see
and everything you can
see, taste, smell, touch,
and imagination is all
part of this one process
that's unfolding and
that's going somewhere.
And so when you
realize that and you
realize that nothing
is separate and there
is no such thing as
anything being separate,
it liberates you from your ego.
>>LISA: So some of our
Facebook questions coming in,
which are great, is
where do politics
fit in with your message?
>>COHEN: Well,
politics and governance
have been and continue to be a
product of cultural evolution.
So throughout
human history we've
learned ways to organize
ourselves and our relationships
with each other in ways
that will make it possible
for us to work together in
greater and greater unity.
>>LISA: Interesting.
So if we can take-- well,
I've heard many times
that the power is being put back
into the hands of the people
in terms of our evolution.
And I've spoken with many people
about the personal empowerment
of politics, and where we're
able to create movements.
And the internet is able to
connect us in a deeper level
and create things
like the Arab Spring.
So in taking these
types of-- this
is basically the evolution
of politics, if you will.
>>COHEN: Well, we're facing
enormous difficulties
in our own political
system right now.
And it's very frustrating and
not satisfying for many of us,
me included, because
the system right now
isn't working very well for us.
But I think if we want to
look at the whole evolution
of the political system in
relationship to human history,
we are living in a much
more civilized world because
of the evolution of our
political systems and emergence
of our political systems
than ever before.
If you go back in 1,000
years to 2,000 years ago,
the world was a much more
dangerous and uncivilized place
to live in.
So the system in this country
right now is not working,
and it's quite
dysfunctional compared
to how many of us think
it should be working.
But the political
system, these are
ways in which we can learn
how to work together and live
together democratically.
It's a system in which the
rights and needs of individuals
are, at least to
profound degrees,
being recognized and honored.
And so if we see the system
that we have in relationship
to history, we see
how far we've come.
It doesn't mean we don't
have a long way to go.
>>LISA: Interesting, right.
>>COHEN: We have
a long way to go
because we want things to be
much better than they are now.
But we want to see
that our capacity
to become more
and more civilized
is continuing to
evolve and develop.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
So it goes along
with the fifth tenet,
which is the cosmic
consciousness.
>>COHEN: Cosmic conscious.
>>LISA: Conscience, sorry.
>>COHEN: Cosmic conscience
is a shift of identity.
And the shift of
identity from my identity
from the personal
ego-- I am merely
my psychological self--
to realizing that who I am
is not separate from the
energy and intelligence that
created the universe and
is creating the universe.
That's who I really am.
That's the energy
and intelligence
that's animating this mind and
body in the form of the mind,
body, and personality,
in my case, of Andrew.
In your case, the mind, body,
and personality of Lisa.
But the energy that's
driving Lisa, the energy
and intelligence that's driving
Lisa, the creative energy
and intelligence
that's driving Lisa
is the same creative
energy and intelligence
that's driving Andrew,
that's driving all of us,
that's animating the
process and compelling
us to want to evolve,
to want to develop,
and to want to make the
world a better place.
>>LISA: That's very clearly
described in this video.
I want you to take a look
at the video of Evolutionary
Enlightenment.
Take a look at this.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>Let yourself follow this
theological fantasy, just
for a moment.
Imagine what it would
be like to be God.
Resting in a perfectly blissful,
overwhelmingly peaceful state
of being for infinite
eons of no time.
In that profound stillness
nothing is missing,
and there is no
desire whatsoever.
Absolutely nothing has occurred.
That's where you were
before the beginning.
Before the Big Bang.
Perfect peace and
boundless bliss.
Quietude without end.
Unburdened by the
weight of existence
you could not have
been more content.
Yet, for some reason, out
of that perfect contentment
you made a decision
to create the cosmos.
You chose to manifest
a material universe
from your own
unmanifest emptiness.
You could have continued
to rest happily
in being, meditating
on nothingness
for more countless eons
of infinite no time.
But you had already
done that, forever.
So you chose to take the
unthinkable step and endeavour
to manifest your own
self in and through form.
Where did that choice come from?
Where in that empty
perfection would the impetus
arise to do something so vast,
so complex, so overwhelming?
What could be a
greater challenge
than to create something
out of nothing?
To manifest the material
universe before form
had ever existed?
But you apparently decided to
take that unimaginable step.
How do I know?
Because it's happening.
Because we are here, now, 14
billion years later reflecting
on this very question.
And considering the fact
that at the deepest level
of consciousness itself
there is only one.
And that one is
who you always are.
You would have to conclude
that at every step of the way,
from before the
beginning and infinite
no time, through
the choice to take
the plunge from
formlessness into form,
and up until the present
moment, it could only be you,
and you alone who is
responsible for all of this.
Who else could it possibly be?
[END VIDEO PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: That was just
beautifully done.
That's just such an
orchestrated piece
that takes you into that
excitement for being alive.
That passion for being alive.
You created a magazine that had
to do with all of this called
"EnlightenNext" where you
communicated your messages
through your magazine
for a long time.
>>COHEN: Yeah, that
was for 19 years.
>>LISA: 19 years, an
award winning magazine.
>>COHEN: Well, when I
came back from India
and I came into Western
culture, postmodern culture,
I realized that a lot of
the things that the Eastern
teachers had told me
weren't necessarily as
true as they were in the past.
Like 5,000 years ago,
3,000 years ago the world
was very different.
And some of these
traditional teachings,
when you take them out of
that traditional context
and bring them into the
modern and postmodern world,
we have to really
begin to rethink
what enlightenment is all about.
So for the first 12
years or so, the magazine
was, what is enlightenment?
Because I was asking
many questions.
To me it was a journey
of inquiry for me.
And then we changed the name
eventually to "EnlightenNext"
because this is when I really
had discovered evolution
and the evolutionary context
for existence and, ultimately
for spiritual liberation.
And then we called
it "EnlightenNext"
which means the
next enlightenment.
>>LISA: And now
the next generation
is you can be found online.
And all of this--
>>COHEN: Oh, absolutely, yes.
>>LISA: You're doing
this through blogging
and constant blogs
and dialogues.
>>COHEN: Well, I want to
get the message out there
because it's so positive
and it can really
help people to discover a
source of meaning and purpose
that can really change
their lives in ways that I
don't think other things can.
It's very exciting.
Evolution is very exciting.
>>LISA: And what is your
ultimate goal with all of this?
What do you hope for us?
>>COHEN: I want to,
with other people,
to help to create a
cultural revolution.
Because we're stuck, culturally.
Those of us at the leading
edge of postmodern culture
are stuck in a cul-de-sac in
terms of where we're going,
how do we make sense
out of all this?
So I'm interested in,
with other people,
creating-- you know it only
took 1,000 people to cause
the Renaissance to happen, and
that was a cultural revolution.
And so what we need now is
a new cultural revolution.
And I think this whole new
big idea about evolution,
and a cultural evolution,
and spiritual evolution
which is about
creating the future,
and consciously creating the
future with other people,
is what I'm really
interested in.
>>LISA: Well, you
have done that today.
And I really appreciate
you being here.
I mean, you've sat with--
>>COHEN: It's been my
pleasure, and my honor.
>>LISA: Well, my honor.
Because you've sat
with amazing people
and had incredible dialogues.
And to have this
experience with you
has been uplifting
and inspirational.
And I just really appreciate it.
>>COHEN: Well, thank you.
Thank you.
>>LISA: Thank you,
thank you so much.
And thank you so
much for watching.
If you'd like to watch
an in-depth interview
that I did with Andrew Cohen
or if you want to share it
with your friends, you
can go to gaiamtv.com.
There's a lot more thought
provoking interviews there,
as well, inspirational
films, and so much more.
So you can go to gaiamtv.com
and sign up for your free trial
membership there.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
Thanks for watching.